From New York Times, I'm Michael Babaro.
This is the daily.
[Music]
In the global fight to dominate AI,
China is quickly catching up to the
United States, which is why President
Trump barred the tech giant Nvidia from
selling its superpowered computer chips
to Chinese companies.
until that is a few days ago when Trump
abruptly reversed course. Today, my
colleague Trip Mikl on how Nvidia's CEO
persuaded Trump that the best way to
beat China at AI is to help China to
compete.
[Applause]
It's Tuesday, July 22nd.
[Music]
>> Well, Trip, thank you for being here in
person. It's very exciting when you tech
folks from the coast make your way here
to New York.
>> Yeah, we come here to sweat. We leave
the cool air of San Francisco to sweat
in New York for the summertime.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Well, I apologize for the
weather here, but nothing else. So, as
you know, we cover a lot of AI here on
the daily because its impact on
everything grows day after day. And here
in the United States, the idea is that
to be number one at AI, we need to stay
ahead of China, our number one
adversary, when it comes to AI. And that
means restricting what American
companies who hold the keys to AI's
future can do in China. And that really
means restricting what a single company
can do. Nvidia, that's a company you
cover.
>> Yeah, absolutely. I mean, in the age of
AI, Nvidia makes the most powerful chips
to develop artificial intelligence. They
have a 90% market share in that
marketplace for a reason. It's because
they began developing this technology
more than a decade before anybody else.
>> And conventional wisdom in Washington
going back to the first Trump
administration when it came to American
technology was restrict restrict
restrict everything that China has
access to. And the Trump administration
came into office with a mission to shut
down Nvidia's shipments to China for the
very reasons we just talked about. Let's
make sure that the American AI companies
stay ahead of the Chinese. And to do so,
we'll shut off the lifeblood of
developing that technology. And that
lifeblood is Nvidia.
But last week, Donald Trump did what he
often does, which is defy Washington
convention. He decided, actually, what
we're going to do is we're going to make
these AI chips available to the Chinese
because paradoxically, we believe that
will actually help American companies in
the long run. M
>> and the big question is like is that
going to prove to be true or not?
>> Right. Well, we're going to try to
unravel that argument in this
conversation that giving China
>> Nvidia's AI chips somehow might benefit
the US, which as you say is quite
>> it's a headscratcher,
>> paradoxical in in theory,
>> but I just want to talk about why this
Trump reversal feels so big. I mean, it
not only undermines the Trump
restriction approach that you just
described so well, it undermines the
idea that China is a national security
threat to the US that you would want to
keep chips away from. And finally, it
undermines this pretty central tenant of
Trumpism when it comes to global trade,
which is you don't embrace the view that
free trade is the answer. This is not
America first.
>> No, this is a globalist approach. This
is sell sell.
>> So what happened here? How and why is it
that the president reversed himself on
Nvidia selling chips to China and in the
process undermining all of these very
natural Trump positions.
>> What happened here is that the chief
executive of the first company to be a
$4 trillion company rolled up his
sleeves and did the one thing he least
enjoys, which is lobbying. So tell us
about this CEO first and then the story
of the sleeve rolling up in the
lobbying.
>> Yeah.
>> In a lot of ways, you know, what I'm
experiencing is probably the ultimate
American dream.
>> Absolutely.
>> Jensen Wong is an electrical engineer by
training. He's an immigrant. His
family's from Taiwan.
>> Come to United States when I was 7 years
old, I guess 8 years old, and and having
the opportunity to found a company with
good friends.
He was raised in Oregon and Kentucky
before going to Oregon State and he
teamed up with a couple of engineers at
a Denny's of all places.
>> Wow.
>> So, we came here right here to this
Denny's, sat right back there and the
three of us decided to start the
company. Frankly, I had no idea how to
do it and nor did they. None of us knew
how to do anything
>> and started hashing out a plan for a new
company that would make chips for video
game developers three decades ago. And
they focused exclusively on the video
gaming industry for the better part of
two decades. And eventually Jensen
discovered that the chips that they were
making were capable of doing computation
simultaneously.
And he saw within that computational
power the potential to develop
artificial intelligence.
>> Mhm.
>> And he began to pour billions of dollars
into creating software that would
control these chips and allow AI
engineers to begin to build the
artificial intelligence systems that
we're now using today. I mean, we would
not be here today without Nvidia.
There's a reason they have become such a
gargantuan company and past Apple,
Microsoft, like all the other tech
companies you've known and thought about
for decades. Nvidia just flew right past
them in the span of 2 years, all because
of this.
[Music]
So, when AI has its lightning strike
moment, the Biden administration begins
to crack down on chip sales. They say to
Nvidia, "Look, we're concerned about the
speed and the processing power of these
chips going to China because as we have
read a lot about, we're concerned that
AI could be used by the Chinese military
to coordinate strikes or to develop
advanced weaponry,
>> right?" And basically create a military
advantage over the United States. And
that's a risk that seems for many
intolerable,
>> right? So in 2022 they say we want you
to throttle the performance of the chips
you sell to China.
>> And by throttle we mean reduce
>> reduce the level of capabilities of the
chips. So Nvidia does that. And the chip
that they came up with eventually for
exclusive sale in China is called the
H20. And it's just a variation of their
chip that
>> is less good.
>> Yeah. Less good than what they sell
elsewhere. You know, in the midst of all
this, Wong is going to Washington for
the first time. He's going to the White
House for the first time ever. I mean,
this is a guy who's been in business for
more than two decades at this point,
nearly three decades. He just hasn't
gone to Washington and had to deal with
political issues before, and he really
doesn't enjoy it.
>> And he's all of a sudden realizing they
need to open an office in Washington.
They'd never done that. And then, you
know, come November, President Trump is
elected to office and they realize, oh,
wait, we don't even have a Republican
lobbyist. So they hired their first
Republican lobbyist.
>> And the icing on the cake for Wong is
when all the other CEOs in Silicon
Valley show up at the inauguration and
sit behind Trump and kind of do all that
you need to do to get in his good graces
at the start of his presidency. Wong was
somewhere else. He was in, of all
places, China.
>> Oh wow. Not the most politically
adroidit decision if you're trying to
influence the incoming president. All
the other tech CEOs got the memo. It
sounds like Yeah,
>> he did not.
>> He did not get the memo.
>> You know, meanwhile, at this point in
time, Trump has tapped Howard Lutnik to
be the head of commerce, which makes the
decisions about what is sold abroad
essentially sets these restrictions. And
>> I take a very jaundist view of China. I
think they only care about themselves
and seek to harm us. And so we need to
protect ourselves, right? And we need to
stop helping them.
>> He's gone before Congress in his cabinet
hearing and said
>> Nvidia's chips, which they bought tons
of and they found their ways around it,
drive their deepseek model. It's got to
end.
>> I'm going to get companies like Nvidia
to stop helping China develop AI. If
they're going to compete with us, let
them compete, but stop using our tools
to compete with us.
>> So, suddenly Wong's troubles are
growing. And as you said, he doesn't
seem to have a lot of inroads to the
Trump administration. He didn't even
show up with the inauguration.
>> He never even met Donald Trump before.
So, Nvidia's put on notice that the
shutdown was coming.
>> Mhm. And Howard Lutnik extends an
invitation to Wong and says, "Look, if
you want to make one last appeal, you
can meet with the president in Mara Lago
on the sidelines of this $1 million
candlelight dinner that President Trump
was hosting as a political fundraiser."
So Wong shows up, talks to the
president, explains that the H20 chip
that he's selling in China is not that
powerful.
But when people in the administration
are briefed on this conversation,
>> they feel like he's misled or undersold
the capabilities of the chip because it
actually has more power than Wong has
led on. And so they move to swiftly shut
it down. And Nvidia gets a letter a few
weeks later saying that they cannot sell
H20s in China.
So he has completely misplayed things
with the Trump administration.
>> I mean they were expecting about $15
million in sales of this chip by the end
of the year. A lot of money in China
>> and suddenly Trump is saying
>> no
>> no go.
>> Mhm.
>> You had mentioned that this is the story
of Wong rolling up his sleeves and
somehow overcoming this enormously
consequential shutdown decision. So,
what is the story of how he pulls that
off after this shutdown?
>> Wong's in need of a strategic reset. And
so, he begins to look for allies within
the administration, and he finds one in
David Saxs, who's the White House AI
adviser,
>> and Zar. The two of them see eye to eye
on the idea that restrictions are not
the answer. Sachs is a venture
capitalist and a libertarian at heart.
And he begins to circulate and promote
this idea that the best way for American
companies in the AI world to succeed is
to get as much of their technology
around the world as fast as possible.
>> Just explain the theory, the philosophy
there, because it's clearly at odds with
what the rest of the administration
thinks.
>> It's at odds with what the rest of the
administration thinks because it's like
a very much a Silicon Valley philosophy.
it is that the more developers you have
and the more people who use your
product, the more committed they become
to that technology. And so the more they
buy it on an each year basis, right?
Like why do you buy another iPhone every
year? It's because you're used to the
way the technology works. It's the exact
same philosophy. And so they're
anticipating that China is going to
challenge Nvidia at some point with a
chipmaker of its own and say we have to
sell as many Nvidia chips abroad in the
same way that Apple wants to sell as
many iPhones abroad before people decide
to buy an Android device.
>> Dominance leads to American supremacy
and AI. Don't restrict it. That's
basically the argument.
>> All right. We will stay further ahead if
we sell more chips than if we restrict
chip sales either in China or anywhere
else in the world.
>> Okay. Well, how does that argument go
with the rest of the administration?
>> With time, they begin to make headway on
this in large part because one of the
focal points of the administration is
this trip that Donald Trump makes to the
Middle East in May.
And one of the things that Donald Trump
wants out of this trip is deals, deals,
deals,
>> right?
>> And so in the runup to that trip, they
began to go to work on a giant chip sale
to the United Arab Emirates. And that is
a capstone of this trip that Donald
Trump makes across the Middle East.
>> President Trump's visit to the Middle
East unleashing a wave of AI deal
making. The Trump administration
clearing a path for Saudi Arabia and the
United Arab Emirates to pursue their
artificial intelligence ambitions as
deals with
>> it culminates in the United Arab
Emirates where they announced the sale
of about 500,000 chips. They're going to
build the largest data centers outside
of the United States in the Emirates.
>> And how does Wong and Nvidia fit into
this?
>> They're all Nvidia chips. And Sax is the
one who's at the negotiating table who
puts this deal together.
>> Thank you very much. It's an honor to be
here. What a great place. What a great
>> And the president is there on his last
day of his trip to praise this deal and
highlight it before flying home.
>> Nvidia is investing and I see my friend
is here, Jensen. That's very good.
Wherever you may be, I thank you very
much cuz he's
>> got it. So Wong gives Trump a major
foreign deal that means a lot to Trump.
>> Wong gives Trump a win. And what does
Trump love? He loves winning and he
loves winners and all of a sudden he
recognizes in Wong a US winner.
>> H where is Jensen by the way? Where is
he? He's standing here. Where is he? I
just saw Beth. Thank you very much
Jensen. I mean Tim Cook isn't here
but you are.
What a job you've done.
>> And Wong decides this is a green light
to go for the ultimate win which is
getting sales back in China. getting the
shutdown on the sales of these chips to
China eliminated.
>> Yeah, absolutely.
[Music]
>> And he knows he needs to grease the
wheels and get support from Trump for
that. And one of the things that Nvidia
does in the midst of all of this is
promise to spend $500 billion on
manufacturing
chips and other AI products in the
United States.
>> Right. Because as we know, most of these
chips are made overseas in Taiwan. He's
saying, "I can bring those here. We can
start making them here. American jobs,
music to Trump's ears."
>> Yep. This is exactly what the president
likes to hear. And all of this builds up
to a meeting at the White House in mid
July where Wong goes into the Oval
Office and begins to make this argument
which is look, let us sell into China.
it will strengthen our business and
strengthen American AI to do so. And
Trump eventually at the end of the
meeting agrees. And you have this
massive reversal with Wong walking out
of the Oval Office elated that he's had
this huge colossal win,
>> right? Because Trump has quite literally
reversed himself on something quite
central to his entire political and
economic identity.
This is the president who started the
crackdown on China to begin with and now
he's the one who's loosening the reigns
for Nvidia and AI chip makers so that
they can plow right into China which
raises this enormous question. What are
the repercussions of this going to be?
And that's what we'll talk about after
the break.
[Music]
We'll be right back.
So, Chip, let's really talk through the
implications of Trump's reversal. And as
we've established, it's a reversal on
all kinds of Trump's core principles.
America first, globalists are bad, China
is a big serious threat. How do you
think he ultimately comes to terms with
this argument that's been made by Wong
and Saxs that selling these chips to
China is somehow not a betrayal of all
those things and that it's somehow good
for the US and not better for China? In
large part, the president came around on
this because of the boogeyman that Wong
and Saxs had created in Huawei,
>> giant telecom company in China,
>> right? And just remind us why Huawei is
a boogeyman.
>> Huawei is a boogeyman and has kind of
really been a boogeyman for Trump
himself going back to the first
administration. It is China's crown
jewel of technology. It is a company
capable of designing smartphones, cars,
telecom. And it's a company that when
Wong talks about it, his eyes widen
because he's petrified that if Huawei is
able to begin making gains in the AI
chips that it makes and they become as
performative as those that Nvidia
offers, that it will just begin to
squeeze Nvidia out of global sales. Mhm.
>> And there's this philosophy in tech
companies, particularly inside chip
companies, that the more they sell, the
more money they make, and the more money
they can plow into research and
development to make their technology
better, faster, higher performance. And
so Saxs and Wong's philosophy here is if
we don't sell to China, we're just
leaving money on the table. And the
Chinese are going to be the ones who are
able to make the money and plow that
money into research and development
>> their own future chips,
>> right? And they're going to leapfrog us.
>> And for the Trump administration,
they're sympathetic to this point of
view. You have to remember China has the
Belt and Road initiative. One of the
things that Nvidia's also talked about
in the course of this is the possibility
that China could create Huawei data
centers around the world and then all of
a sudden instead of having American data
centers and running AI on American
technology, you have the risk of running
it on Chinese technology. And just to
explain what you're saying, one belt,
one road. China's infrastructure program
where it deploys its money and sometimes
its expertise to help developing
economies get where they want to be when
it comes to energy or roadways, solar.
The idea is that Huawei could help China
layer on top of that AI technology
around the world. So the entire global
AI economy could suddenly be operating
on Chinese systems, not American ones.
That's the fear.
>> That's the fear. And there's a a window
right now where Nvidia is ahead of
Huawei in terms of the quality of the
chips it makes, in terms of its ability
to make those chips. And Nvidia has
argued we should take advantage of that
window. Sachs has argued we should take
advantage of that window. You have
voices inside the administration largely
because of SAGs who begin to to listen
to this idea and take it very very
seriously. help me better understand the
vision that Wong especially has and has
successfully sold to the president that
giving China Nvidia's chips undermines
Huawei without risking the idea that
China uses Nvidia's chips to strengthen
Huawei and leapfrog the US in AI. The
philosophy there is basically that if
Nvidia is not present, then Huawei is
going to have to make gains in its chip
development. It will have to catch up to
Nvidia.
>> That's interesting. In other words, if
China has Nvidia's chips, if China has
America's chips,
>> right?
>> It's less incentivized to get really
creative and strive to beat us.
>> Yeah. Essentially, and clutter the
marketplace. Do you uh do you like auto
racing at all? No,
>> no,
>> but I can I want to go wherever this
metaphor is.
>> Go with me. So, I in a past life, I was
a sports writer and I covered NASCAR.
And in the world of NASCAR, teams like
Hendrick Motorsports, which Dale
Earnhard Jr. drove for, Jeff Gordon
drove for, Chase Elliot drives for, they
make engines, Chevrolet engines, and
they sell them to other teams, and then
they pour the money back into making
better engines. And so they equip cars
on the track that they compete against
with the very same engine that's under
the hood of their race cars. Now, this
means that they can have more money to
make more sophisticated cars than
potentially their competitors.
>> Do they ever get beaten by their
competitors using their same engines?
>> And this is the big conundrum, right?
Because there's so many other dimensions
that go into racing. There's the driver
behind the wheel. There's aerodynamics
and the way the car there's road
conditions, there are wrecks, right?
Like you just don't know what's going to
happen.
>> And so essentially what what Nvidia has
said is, you know, let us sell our
engine overseas, China will build on
that engine, right? But we don't know
whether or not China will make a leaprog
in its AI development. Just like you
don't know when you put a Hendrick car
on the track whether or not a competing
car that has a Hendrick motor in it will
pass it. somewhere along the way. The
difference is if you're thinking about
this racing analogy, you know, if your
car loses, like that's not a big deal,
right? But if if you're thinking about
this and you're somebody in the national
security orbit in Washington and you're
thinking about this and saying, "This
isn't a car that loses on a track. This
is a system that could be used to
coordinate military strikes, as we
talked about earlier, develop weapons.
it can be used for all these other
purposes, right?
>> So, you do have the advantage of knowing
the tech that is in that system, but you
can't predict or control all the other
factors that go into,
>> right? I mean, it's ultimately a very
big bet on the idea that American
ingenuity when unfettered in the market
will remain dominant. And as you've
said, the risks are high that it might
not work. I want to go back inside the
Trump administration for a moment. You
said that this argument prevails. I'm
curious given the number of China hawks
in the administration
whether despite the fact that it has
prevailed, there's some meaningful
dissent within the administration over
the fact that Trump is willing to let
China have this potential opportunity to
leaprog us even if the theory is it
won't. Many of those voices have been
sidelined in the past few months inside
the administration and they have not
been able to push back.
>> Why?
We we don't have a real clear answer on
this, but the Trump administration has
been so focused on trying to negotiate a
trade agreement with China that it has
begun to negotiate around some of these
restrictions as well. Well, that raises
an interesting possibility. Is this part
of a larger trade deal with China?
>> Howard Lutnik went on TV after Wong
announced that he was open for business
in China again.
>> I'm looking at Nvidia getting a deal to
be allowed to sell certain chips. Is
that a change of heart? Well, it's funny
because the Biden administration allowed
China to buy these chips last year. So
then we held it up
>> and he said
>> and then in the magnets deal with the
Chinese we told them that we would start
to resell them. So remember these are
>> this is part of a broader negotiation in
part because China shut off access to
rare earth metals that US companies need
to make products. So that was a factor
here. Now, the other thing that Howard
Lutnik went on and said was exactly what
Sachs and Wong had been telling him,
which is
>> balance. We don't sell them our best
stuff, not our second best stuff, not
even our third best. I think fourth best
is where we've come out that we're cool.
>> This is the fourth best chip we make and
that's what we're providing the Chinese
with. And that's why we will still stay
ahead. So, yes, like it clutters the
marketplace in China. It allows Nvidia
to generate sales and by the way it is
not the best we have to offer.
>> Right? So you want to keep one step
ahead of what they can build so they
keep buying our chips because remember
you want the world's developers to use
your tech. So Nvidia is driven to make
sure all the developers of the world are
still using their technology. So you
want to
>> and so there's this giant gamble by the
administration that that's good enough
to keep American AI companies ahead,
>> right? Because we do have the first,
second, and third best chips here in the
US. Let me zoom out for just a moment
and put what Trump just did with these
chips going to China into a larger
context of where we are in this moment
for AI.
Because this reversal arrives at a
pretty interesting moment for AI in the
US. I have watched with enormous
interest as tech companies here in the
states engage in this unprecedented
talent arms race. We're seeing job
offers with $100 million
compensation packages attached to them
for a single engineer. And I know that
might seem disconnected from what's
going on with chips in China, but I
suspect it's not.
>> It's not in a way that has slipped under
the radar a little bit. Some of these
engineers that are getting these giant
pay packages are actually Chinese. And
one of the reasons that Wong has been so
focused on getting back into China is
because China accounts for 50% of the AI
developers in the world. One country,
50%. Right? So in a weird weird way or
an unexpected way, American AI cannot
succeed without China, right? Nvidia
needs to sell chips over there and China
has really sophisticated engineers and
they are at the forefront of AI
development and so you're going to want
some of that talent. Like look, this is
a talent game. I mean Zuckerberg's
spending $100 million because he
believes that these guys can really
turbocharge what they're developing
there. So you can't build a wall between
the US and China on this. And the other
thing that's at odds or in tension here
are national security interests and
economic interests. Right.
>> Explain that.
>> National security folks are very very
worried about what China could do to
harm the US. Right. They're taking a
very glass half empty view and a risk
focused look at China. Silicon Valley is
looking at the opportunity to make
billions and billions and billions of
dollars from this AI transformation.
We're talking about a trillion dollar
disruption of the entire economy. And so
they are racing as fast as they can to
grab as big a piece of that as possible.
And those two forces are at odds with
each other right now. And what we saw in
Trump's decision is he decided to side
with the economic forces and choose that
over the national security concerns.
It's really a glass half full promise,
right? And he's really going out on a
limb,
>> right? And by choosing the economic side
of the ledger, Trump is making a bet, a
historic bet, that the US can keep its
advantages over China and stay ahead of
the national security threat that
Nvidia's relationship with China could
present. That's the hope. You hope that
your car stays faster on the track than
anybody else's.
[Music]
Well, Trip, thank you very much. Thanks
for having me.
[Music]
We'll be right back.
Here's
what else you need to know. Today,
during a closely watched court hearing
on Monday, a federal judge in Boston
appeared deeply skeptical of the Trump
administration's efforts to strip
Harvard University of billions of
dollars in research funding. Harvard has
argued that the White House tactics
violated the university's rights under
the First Amendment. The White House, on
the other hand, has framed them as a
righteous response to anti-semitism.
The judge will issue a final ruling
without a trial as soon as September,
and Monday's hearing suggested that
Harvard may prevail.
Today's episode was produced by Stella
Tan, Sydney Harper, and Jessica Chung
with help from Alex Stern and Eric
Krupky. It was edited by Lexi Dial,
contains original music by Marian
Lozano, Dan Powell, Diane Wong, and Pat
McCusker, and was engineered by Chris
Wood. Our theme music is by Jim Brunberg
and Ben Lansfk of Wonderly.
[Music]
That's it for the Daily. I'm Michael
Babbor. See you tomorrow.
[Music]